.TH LOCKFS\-NOTIFY 1 2012\-05\-22 bilibop "User Commands"

.SH NAME
lockfs\-notify \- notify user about temporary or permanent changes on fs

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B lockfs\-notify
.RI [ \-a | \-\-always | \-l | \-\-lockfs | \-n | \-\-nolockfs ]
.RI [ \-t
.IR TIME | \-\-expire\-time = TIME ]
.br
.B lockfs\-notify
.IR \-h | \-\-help

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B lockfs\-notify
is a wrapper around
.BR notify\-send (1).
It is used to send a notification to users at the beginning of a session,
to say if temporary or permanent changes are allowed on which filesystems
(or more precisely on which mountpoints).

.SH OPTIONS
If several of the
.IR \-a ,
.I \-l
or
.I \-n
options are invoked (or their long forms, respectively
.IR \-\-always ,
.I \-\-lockfs
or
.IR \-\-nolockfs ),
the last overrides the previous ones. The invocation of these options also
overrides the variable \(aqBILIBOP_LOCKFS_NOTIFY_POLICY\(aq that can be set in
.BR bilibop.conf (5).
.PP
.BR \-a ,
.B \-\-always
.RS
Always send a notification: about filesystems on which permanent changes
are allowed, and about filesystems on which temporary changes are allowed.
So, if the
.B bilibop\-lockfs
feature is enabled, and one or more mountpoints have been whitelisted in
.IR /etc/bilibop/bilibop.conf ,
then two notifications are send to the user.
.RE
.PP
.BR \-h ,
.B \-\-help
.RS
Print a short help message on stdout and exit.
.RE
.PP
.BR \-l ,
.B \-\-lockfs
.RS
Send a notification only about filesystems for which the \(aqlockfs\(aq feature
has been enabled, i.e. about mountpoints for which only temporary changes
are allowed. All these changes will be lost at next shutdown of the
computer.
.RE
.PP
.BR \-n ,
.B \-\-nolockfs
.RS
Send a notification only about filesystems for which the \(aqlockfs\(aq feature
has been disabled, i.e. about mountpoints for which permanent changes are
allowed. All these changes will be kept after the shutdown of the computer.
.RE
.PP
.B \-t
.IR TIME ,
.BI \-\-expire\-time= TIME
.RS
Specifies the timeout in milliseconds at which to expire the notification.
Values of
.I TIME
less than
.BI \(aq 1000 \(aq
(1 second) make the timeout is disabled and the notification never expires.
If
.I TIME
is not an integer, this option is silently ignored.
.RE

.SH FILES
/etc/xdg/autostart/lockfs\-notify.desktop

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bilibop (7),
.BR bilibop.conf (5),
.BR notify\-send (1)

.SH AUTHOR
This manual page has been written by Bilibop Project <quidame@poivron.org>.
