.TH LSBILIBOP 8 2013\-11\-24 bilibop "System Administration"

.SH NAME
lsbilibop \- list BILIBOP tagged devices, display or update some of their udev properties

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B lsbilibop
.RB [ \-l ]
.br
.B lsbilibop
.RB [ \-a | \-c | \-i ]
.RI [ DEVICE
.RI [ DEVICE
.RI [ ... ]]]
.br
.B lsbilibop \-h

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B lsbilibop
is a simple shell script that ouputs the list of
.I BILIBOP
tagged block devices and some of their
.BR udev (7)
properties, or triggers uevents to update udev rules and properties that
can be applied to these devices.
.P
If the operating system is running from an external and writable support
(USB or SD Flash Memory, USB, Firewire or eSATA HDD), then the
.I BILIBOP
tagged devices are the block devices whose contents are on the same
physical disk than the root filesystem. This includes
.BR disk ,
.BR partitions ,
but also
.B device\-mapper
and
.B loopback
devices, and even block devices containing a filesystem used as
lower/readonly branch of an
.BR aufs (5)
mountpoint. The rules file
.I /lib/udev/rules.d/66\-bilibop.rules
(or
.IR /etc/udev/rules.d/66\-bilibop.rules )
is used to find and tag such devices.

.SH OPTIONS
Options must be invoked before arguments.
When invoked without option,
.B lsbilibop
just outputs a list of the device(s) given as arguments
(if they are
.I BILIBOP
tagged block devices), or of all
.I BILIBOP
tagged block devices if none is specified. Devices are listed in the same
order than in
.IR /proc/partitions ,
i.e. in the order they have been discovered by the kernel. Absolute or
relative paths and symlinks can be used to specify a device. Shell
wildcards are allowed.
.TP 4
.B \-a
Trigger \(aqdevice
.BR add \(aq
uevent for the device(s) given as arguments (if they are
.I BILIBOP
tagged block devices), or of all BILIBOP tagged block devices if none is
specified, to update their properties. This can be used each time the
corresponding BILIBOP_RULES_* variables are modified in
.BR bilibop.conf (5),
to apply the new settings without need to reboot the operating system.
.TP
.B \-c
Trigger \(aqdevice
.BR change\(aq
uevent for the device(s) given as arguments (if they are
.I BILIBOP
tagged block devices), or of all BILIBOP tagged block devices if none is
specified, to update their properties. This can be used each time the
corresponding BILIBOP_RULES_* variables are modified in
.BR bilibop.conf (5),
to apply the new settings without need to reboot the operating system.
.TP
.B \-h
Print a help page on standard output and exit.
.TP
.B \-i
Display some useful
.BR udev (7)
properties of the device(s) given as arguments (if they are
.I BILIBOP
tagged block devices), or of all
.I BILIBOP
tagged block devices if none is specified.
This option overrides \-a and \-c options.
.IP
The following properties are only informative. The two last ones are set
if and only if
.B udisks 1.x
(ID_DRIVE_DETACHABLE) and/or
.B udisks 2.x
(UDISKS_CAN_POWER_OFF) are installed.
.IP
DEVNAME
.br
BILIBOP_DISK
.br
BILIBOP_PARTITION
.br
BILIBOP_UNDERLYING_PARTITION
.br
DEVLINKS
.IP
ID_DRIVE_DETACHABLE
.br
UDISKS_CAN_POWER_OFF
.IP
The following properties can be used to set BILIBOP_RULES_*_WHITELIST and
other variables in
.BR bilibop.conf (5):
.IP
ID_FS_LABEL
.br
ID_FS_TYPE
.br
ID_FS_USAGE
.br
ID_FS_UUID
.IP
The following properties can be modified by changing the corresponding
BILIBOP_RULES_* variables in
.BR bilibop.conf (5).
They are set if and only if
.B udisks 1.x
(for the first set) and/or
.B udisks 2.x
(for the second set) are installed.
.IP
UDISKS_PRESENTATION_HIDE
.br
UDISKS_PRESENTATION_ICON_NAME
.br
UDISKS_PRESENTATION_NAME
.br
UDISKS_SYSTEM_INTERNAL
.IP
UDISKS_IGNORE
.br
UDISKS_ICON_NAME
.br
UDISKS_NAME
.br
UDISKS_SYSTEM
.TP
.B \-l
Dont't rely on the \(aqBILIBOP\(aq tag to list the devices.
This option is based on the
.I bilibop\-common
shell library.

.SH ERRORS
If the \(aqBILIBOP\(aq tag does not exist in the udev database, then
.B lsbilibop
displays a useful error message on stderr, and lists the device nodes whose
content is supposed to be written on the same physical disk than the root
filesystem (as does the \-l option). Exit code is 8.

.SH FILES
/etc/bilibop/bilibop.conf
.br
/usr/share/doc/bilibop\-rules/examples/bilibop.conf
.br
/usr/share/bilibop/bilibop_rules_generator
.br
/lib/udev/rules.d/66\-bilibop.rules
.br
/etc/udev/rules.d/66\-bilibop.rules

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bilibop (7),
.BR bilibop.conf (5),
.BR drivemap (1),
.BR udev (7),
.BR udevadm (8),
.BR udisks (7),
.BR udisks (8)

.SH AUTHOR
This manual page has been written by Bilibop Project <quidame@poivron.org>.
